<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 74-81 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 74–81)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

69

    id:int
    name :str = Field(None, title="name of student", max_length=10)
    percent_marks: float

@app.post("/marks", response_model=percent)
async def get_percent(s1:student):
    s1.percent_marks=sum(s1.marks)/2
    return s1
If we check the Swagger documentation, it shows that the "/marks" route
gets an object of student class as the request body. Populate the attributes
with appropriate values and execute the get_percent() function.

The server response is cast to the percent class as it has been used as the
response_model.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

70

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

71

Each attribute of a Pydantic model has a type. The type can be a built -in
Python type or a model itself. Hence it is possible to declare nested JSON
"objects" with specific attribute names, types, and validations.
Example
In the following example, we construct a customer model with one of the
attributes as product model class. The product model in turn has an
attribute of supplier class.
from typing import Tuple
from fastapi import FastAPI
from pydantic import BaseModel
app = FastAPI()

class supplier(BaseModel):
    supplierID:int
    supplierName:str

class product(BaseModel):
    productID:int
    prodname:str
    price:int
    supp:supplier

class customer(BaseModel):
    custID:int
    custname:str
    prod:Tuple[product]
21. FastAPI – Nested Models

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

72

The following POST operation decorator renders the object of the customer
model as the server response.
@app.post('/invoice')
async def getInvoice(c1:customer):
    return c1
The swagger UI page reveals the presence of three schemas, corresponding
to three BaseModel classes.

The Customer schema when expanded to show all the nodes looks like this:

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

73


An example response of "/invoice" route should be as follows:
{
  "custID": 1,
  "custname": "Jay",
  "prod": [
    {
      "productID": 1,
      "prodname": "LAPTOP",
      "price": 40000,
      "supp": {
        "supplierID": 1,
        "supplierName": "Dell"

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

74

      }
    }
  ]
}

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

75

The built-in dependency injection system of FastAPI makes it possible to
integrate components easier when building your API. In programming,
Dependency injection refers to the mechanism where an object receives
other objects that it depends on. The other objects are called dependencies.
Dependency injection has the following advantages:
 reuse the same shared logic

 share database connections

 enforce authentication and security features

Assuming that a FastAPI app has two operation functions both having th e
same query parameters id, name and age.
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/user/")
async def user(id: str, name: str, age: int):
    return {"id": id, "name": name, "age": age}

@app.get("/admin/")
async def admin(id: str, name: str, age: int):
    return {"id": id, "name": name, "age": age}
In case of any changes such as adding/removing query parameters, both
the route decorators and functions need to be changed.
FastAPI provides Depends class and its object is used as a common
parameter in such cases. First import Depends from FastAPI and define a
function to receive these parameters:
async def dependency(id: str, name: str, age: int):
    return {"id": id, "name": name, "age": age}
22. FastAPI – Dependencies

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

76

Now we can use the return value of this function as a parameter in operation
functions
@app.get("/user/")
async def user(dep: dict = Depends(dependency)):
    return dep
For each new Request, FastAPI calls the dependency function using the
corresponding parameters, returns the result, and assigns the result to your
operation.
You can use a class for managing dependencies instead of a function.
Declare a class with id, name and age as attributes.
class dependency:
    def __init__(self, id: str, name: str, age: int):
        self.id = id
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
Use this class as the type of parameters.
@app.get("/user/")
async def user(dep: dependency = Depends(dependency)):
    return dep

@app.get("/admin/")
async def admin(dep: dependency = Depends(dependency)):
    return dep
Here, we used the dependency injection in the operation function. It can
also be used as operation decoration. For example, we want to check if the
value of query parameter age is less than 21. If yes it should throw an
exception. So, we write a function to check it and use it as a dependency.
