<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 82-89 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 82–89)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

77

async def validate(dep: dependency = Depends(dependency)):
    if dep.age < 18:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=400, detail="You are
not eligible")
@app.get("/user/", dependencies=[Depends(validate)])
async def user():
    return {"message": "You are eligible"}
In FastAPI dependency management, you can use yield instead of return to
add some extra steps. For example, the following function uses database
dependency with yield.
async def get_db():
    db = DBSession()
    try:
        yield db
    finally:
        db.close()

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

78

Cross-Origin Resource Sharing  (CORS) is a situation when a frontend
application that is running on one client browser tries to communicate with
a backend through JavaScript code, and the backend is in a different "origin"
than the frontend.  The origin here is a combination of protocol, domain
name, and port numbers. As a result, http://localhost and https://localhost
have different origins.
If the browser with a URL of one origin sends a request for the execution of
JavaScript code from another origin, the browser sends an OPTIONS HTTP
request.
If the backend authorizes the communication from this different origin by
sending the appropriate headers it will let the JavaScript in the frontend
send its request to the backend. For that, the backend must have a list of
"allowed origins".
To specify explicitly the allowed origins, import CORSMiddleware and add
the list of origins to the app's middleware.
from fastapi import FastAPI
from fastapi.middleware.cors import CORSMiddleware

app = FastAPI()

origins = [
    "http://192.168.211.:8000",
    "http://localhost",
    "http://localhost:8080",
]

app.add_middleware(
    CORSMiddleware,
    allow_origins=origins,
23. FastAPI – CORS

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

79

    allow_credentials=True,
    allow_methods=["*"],
    allow_headers=["*"],
)

@app.get("/")
async def main():
    return {"message": "Hello World"}

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

80

The REST architecture uses HTTP verbs or methods for the operation on the
resources. The POST, GET, PUT and DELETE methods perform respectively
CREATE, READ, UPDATE and DELETE operations respectively.
In the following example, we shall use a Python list as an in -memory
database and perf orm the CRUD operations on it. First, let us set up a
FastAPI app object and declare a Pydantic model called Book.
from fastapi import FastAPI
from pydantic import BaseModel

app = FastAPI()

data = []

class Book(BaseModel):
    id: int
    title: str
    author: str
    publisher: str
An object of this model is populated using the @app.post() decorator and
it is appended to the list of books (data is declared for the list of books)
@app.post("/book")
def add_book(book: Book):
    data.append(book.dict())
    return data
In the Swagger UI, execute this operation function a couple of times and
add some data.
24. FastAPI – CRUD Operations

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

81


The server’s JSON response shows the list of books added so far.

To retrieve the list, define an operation function bound to the @app.get()
decorator as follows:

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

82

@app.get("/list")
def get_books():
    return data
To retrieve a book with its id as a path parameter, define the get() operation
decorator and get_book() function as below:
@app.get("/book/{id}")
def get_book(id: int):
    id = id - 1
    return data[id]
The /list route retrieves all the books.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

83


On the other hand, use "id" as the path parameter in the "/book/1" route.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

84


The book with "id=1" will be retrieved as can be seen in the server response
of Swagger UI

Next, define @app.put() decorator that modifies an object in the data list.
This decorator too has a path parameter for the id field.
@app.put("/book/{id}")
def add_book(id: int, book: Book):
