<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 2-9 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 2–9)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

i


About the T utorial
FastAPI is a modern Python web framework, very efficient in building APIs.
FastAPI has been developed by Sebastian Ramirez in Dec. 2018. FastAPI
0.68.0 is the currently available version. The latest version requires Python
3.6 or above. It is one of the fastest web frameworks of Python.
Audience
This tutorial is designed for developers who want to learn how to build REST
APIs using Python.
Prerequisites
Before you proceed, make sure that you understand the basics of procedural
and object -oriented programming in Python. Knowledge of REST
architecture is an added advantage.
Disclaimer & Copyright
 Copyright 2022 by Tutorials Point (I) Pvt. Ltd.
All the conte nt and graphics published in this e -book are the property of
Tutorials Point (I) Pvt. Ltd. The user of this e -book is prohibited to reuse,
retain, copy, distribute or republish any contents or a part of contents of
this e-book in any manner without written consent of the publisher.
We strive to update the contents of our website and tutorials as timely and
as precisely as possible, however, the contents may contain inaccuracies or
errors. Tutorials Point (I) Pvt. Ltd. provides no guarantee regarding the
accuracy, timeliness or completeness of our website or its contents
including this tutorial. If you discover any errors on our website or in this
tutorial, please notify us at contact@tutorialspoint.com.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

ii

T able of Contents
About the Tutorial ........................................................................................................ i
Audience ...................................................................................................................... i
Prerequisites ................................................................................................................ i
Disclaimer & Copyright ................................................................................................. i
Table of Contents ........................................................................................................ ii
1. FASTAPI – INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ..........1
FastAPI – Environment Setup ...................................................................................... 1
2. FASTAPI – HELLO WORLD ................................ ................................ ............3
Getting Started ............................................................................................................ 3
3. FASTAPI – OPENAPI ................................ ................................ .....................5
4. FASTAPI – UVICORN................................ ................................ .....................9
5. FASTAPI – TYPE HINTS ................................ ................................ ...............12
6. FASTAPI – IDE SUPPORT ................................ ................................ ............16
7. FASTAPI – REST ARCHITECTURE ................................ ................................ .19
8. FASTAPI – PATH PARAMETERS ................................ ................................ ...20
Check OpenAPI docs .................................................................................................. 22
Path Parameters with Types...................................................................................... 25
9. FASTAPI – QUERY PARAMETERS ................................ ................................ 27
10. FASTAPI – PARAMETER VALIDATION ................................ ......................... 31

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

iii

11. FASTAPI – PYDANTIC................................ ................................ ..................37
12. FASTAPI – REQUEST BODY ................................ ................................ .........40
13. FASTAPI – TEMPLATES ................................ ................................ ...............47
14. FASTAPI – STATIC FILES ................................ ................................ ..............52
15. FASTAPI – HTML FORM TEMPLATES ................................ .......................... 56
16. FASTAPI – ACCESSING FORM DATA ................................ ........................... 58
17. FASTAPI – UPLOADING FILES ................................ ................................ .....60
18. FASTAPI – COOKIE PARAMETERS ................................ ............................... 62
19. FASTAPI – HEADER PARAMETERS ................................ .............................. 65
20. FASTAPI – RESPONSE MODEL ................................ ................................ ....68
21. FASTAPI – NESTED MODELS ................................ ................................ ......71
22. FASTAPI – DEPENDENCIES ................................ ................................ .........75
23. FASTAPI – CORS ................................ ................................ ......................... 78
24. FASTAPI – CRUD OPERATIONS ................................ ................................ ...80
25. FASTAPI – SQL DATABASES ................................ ................................ ........88
26. FASTAPI – USING MONGODB ................................ ................................ ....94
27. FASTAPI – USING GRAPHQL ................................ ................................ .......99
28. FASTAPI – WEBSOCKETS ................................ ................................ .......... 102

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

iv

29. FASTAPI – FASTAPI EVENT HANDLERS ................................ ..................... 106
30. FASTAPI – MOUNTING A SUB-APP ................................ ...........................  108
31. FASTAPI – MIDDLEWARE ................................ ................................ ......... 111
32. FASTAPI – MOUNTING FLASK APP ................................ ...........................  113
33. FASTAPI – DEPLOYMENT ................................ ................................ ......... 115

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

1

FastAPI is a modern Python web framework, very efficient in building APIs.
It is based on Python’s type hints feature that has been added since Python
3.6 onwards. It is one of the fastest web frameworks of Python.
 As it works on the functionality of Starlette and Pydantic libraries, its
performance is amongst the best and on par with that of NodeJS and
Go.

 In addition to offering high performance, FastAPI offers significant
speed for development, reduces human-induced errors in the code,
is easy to learn and is completely production-ready.

 FastAPI is fully compatible with well -known standards of APIs,
namely OpenAPI and JSON schema.
FastAPI has been developed by Sebastian Ramirez in Dec. 2018. FastAPI
0.68.0 is the currently available version.
FastAPI – Environment Setup
To install FastAPI (preferably in a virtual environment), use pip installer.
pip3 install fastapi
FastAPI depends on Starlette and Pydantic libraries, hence they also get
installed.
Installing Uvicorn using PIP
FastAPI doesn’t come with any built -in server application. To run FastAPI
app, you need an ASGI server called uvicorn, so install the same too, using
pip installer. It will also install uvicorn’s dependencies - asgiref, click, h11,
and typing-extensions
pip3 install uvicorn
With these two libraries installed, we can check all the libraries installed so
far.
1. FastAPI – Introduction

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

2

pip3 freeze

asgiref==3.4.1
click==8.0.1
colorama==0.4.4
fastapi==0.68.0
h11==0.12.0
importlib-metadata==4.6.4
pydantic==1.8.2
starlette==0.14.2
typing-extensions==3.10.0.0
uvicorn==0.15.0
zipp==3.5.0

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

3

Getting Started
The first step in creating a FastAPI app is to declare the application object
of FastAPI class.
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()
This app object is the main point of interaction of the application with the
client browser. The uvicorn server uses this object to listen to client’s
request.
The next step is to create path operation. Path is a URL which when visited
by the client invokes visits  a mapped URL to one of the HTTP methods, an
associated function is to be executed.  We need to bind a view function to
a URL and the corresponding HTTP method. For example, the index()
function corresponds to ‘/’ path with ‘get’ operation.
@app.get("/")
async def root():
    return {"message": "Hello World"}
The function returns a JSON response, however, it can return dict, list,
str, int, etc. It can also return Pydantic models.
Save the following code as main.py
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
async def index():
    return {"message": "Hello World"}
2. FastAPI – Hello World

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

4

Start the uvicorn server by mentioning the file in which the FastAPI
application object is instantiated.
uvicorn main:app --reload

INFO: Uvicorn running on http://127.0.0.1:8000 (Press CTRL+C
to quit)
INFO: Started reloader process [28720]
INFO: Started server process [28722]
INFO: Waiting for application startup.
INFO: Application startup complete.
Open the browser and visit http://localhost:/8000. You will see the JSON
response in the browser window.
