<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 114-121 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 114–121)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

109


The sub application’s docs are available at
http://localhost:8000/subapp/docs

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

110

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

111

A middleware is a function that is processed with every request (before
being processed by any specific path operation) as well as with every
response before returning it.  This function takes each request that comes
to your application.  It may perform some process with the request by
running a code defined in it and then passes the request to be processed
by the corresponding operation function. It can also process the response
generated by the operation function before returning it.
Following are some of the middleware available in FastAPI library:
 CORSMiddleware
 HTTPSRedirectMiddleware
 TrustedHostMiddleware
 GZipMiddleware
FastAPI provides app.add_middleware() function to handle server errors
and custom exception handlers. In addition to the above integrated
middleware, it is possible to define a custom middleware. The following
example defines the addmiddleware() function and decorates it into a
middleware by decorating it with @app.middleware() decorator.
The function has two parameters,  the HTTP request object, and the
call_next() function that will send the API request to its corresponding
path and return a response.
In addition to the middleware function, the application also has two
operation functions.
import time
from fastapi import FastAPI, Request

app = FastAPI()

@app.middleware("http")
async def addmiddleware(request: Request, call_next):
    print("Middleware works!")
31. FastAPI – Middleware

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

112

    response = await call_next(request)
    return response
@app.get("/")
async def index():
    return {"message":"Hello World"}

@app.get("/{name}")
async def hello(name:str):
    return {"message":"Hello "+name}
As the application runs, for each request made by the browser, the
middleware output (Middleware works!) will appear in the console log before
the response output.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

113

A WSGI application written in Flask or Django framework can be wrapped
in WSGIMiddleware and mounted it on a FastAPI app to make it ASGI
compliant.
First install the Flask package in the current FastAPI environment.
pip3 install flask
The following code is a minimal Flask application:
from flask import Flask
flask_app = Flask(__name__)

@flask_app.route("/")
def index_flask():
    return "Hello World from Flask!"
Then declare app as a FastAPI application object and define an operation
function for rendering Hello World message.
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
def index():
    return {"message": "Hello World from FastAPI!"}
Next, mount the flask application as a sub application of FastAPI ma in app
using mount() method.
from fastapi.middleware.wsgi import WSGIMiddleware
app.mount("/flask", WSGIMiddleware(flask_app))
32. FastAPI – Mounting Flask App

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

114

Run the Uvicorn development server.
uvicorn flaskapp:app –reload
The main FastAPI application is available at the URL http://localhost:8000/
route.
{"message":"Hello World from FastAPI!"}
The Flask sub application is mounted at the URL
http://localhost:8000/flask.
Hello World from Flask!

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

115

So far, we have been using a local development server "Uvicorn" to run our
FastAPI application. In order to make the application publicly available, it
must be deployed on a remote server with a static IP address. It can be
deployed to different p latforms such as Heroku, Google Cloud, nginx, etc.
using either free plans or subscription based services.
In this chapter, we are going to use Deta cloud platform. Its free to use
deployment service is very easy to use.
First of all, to use Deta, we need to create an account on its website with a
suitable username and password of choice.

33. FastAPI – Deployment

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

116

Once the account is created, install Deta CLI (command line interface) on
the local machine. Create a folder for your application (c:\fastapi_deta_app)
If you are using Linux, use the following command in the terminal:
iwr https://get.deta.dev/cli.ps1 -useb | iex
If you are using Windows, run the following command from Windows
PowerShell terminal:
PS C:\fastapi_deta_app> iwr https://get.deta.dev/cli.ps1 -useb
| iex
Deta was installed successfully to
C:\Users\User\.deta\bin\deta.exe
Run 'deta --help' to get started
Use the login command and authenticate your username and password.
PS C:\fastapi_deta_app> deta login
Please, log in from the web page. Waiting...
https://web.deta.sh/cli/60836
Logged in successfully.
In the same application folder, create a minimal FastAPI application in
main.py file
# main.py
from fastapi import FastAPI

app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
def read_root():
    return {"Hello": "World"}

@app.get("/items/{item_id}")
def read_item(item_id: int):
    return {"item_id": item_id}
