<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 90-97 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 90–97)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

85

    data[id-1] = book
    return data
Inspect this operation function in the swagger UI . Give id=1, and change
value of publisher to BPB in the request body.

When executed, the response shows the list with object with id=1 updated
with the new values.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

86


Finally, we define the @app.delete() decorator to delete an object
corresponding to the path parameter.
@app.delete("/book/{id}")
def delete_book(id: int):
    data.pop(id-1)
    return data
Give id=1 as the path parameter and execute the function.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

87


Upon execution, the list now shows only two objects.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

88

In the previo us chapter, a Python list has been used as an in -memory
database to perform CRUD operations using FastAPI. Instead, we can use
any relational database (such as MySQL, Oracle, etc.) to perform store,
retrieve, update and delete operations.
Instead of using a DB-API compliant database driver, we shall use
SQLAlchemy as an interface between Python code and a database (we are
going to use SQLite database as Python has in -built support for it).
SQLAlchemy is a popular SQL toolkit and Object Relational Mapper.
Object Relational Mapping is a programming technique for converting data
between incompatible type systems in object -oriented programming
languages. Usually, the type system used in an Object -Oriented language
like Python contains non -scalar types. However, data types in most of the
database products such as Oracle, MySQL, etc., are of primitive types such
as integers and strings.
In an ORM system, each class maps to a table in the underlying database.
Instead of writing tedious database interfacing code yourself, an ORM takes
care of these issues for you while you can focus on programming the logics
of the system.
In order to use SQLAlchemy, we need to first install the library using the
PIP installer.
pip install sqlalchemy
SQLAlchemy is designed to operat e with a DBAPI implementation built for
a particular database. It uses dialect system to communicate with various
types of DBAPI implementations and databases. All dialects require that an
appropriate DBAPI driver is installed.
The following are the dialects included −
 Firebird
 Microsoft SQL Server
 MySQL
 Oracle
 PostgreSQL
25. FastAPI – SQL Databases

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

89

 SQLite
 Sybase
Since we are going to use SQLite database, we need to create a database
engine for our database called test.db. Import create_engine() function
from sqlalchemy module.
from sqlalchemy import create_engine
from sqlalchemy.dialects.sqlite import *
SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URL = "sqlite:///./test.db"
engine = create_engine(SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URL, connect_args =
{"check_same_thread": False})
In order to interact with the database, we  need to obtain its handle. A
session object is the handle to database. Session class is defined using
sessionmaker() – a configurable session factory method which is bound
to the engine object.
from sqlalchemy.orm import sessionmaker, Session
session = sessionmaker(autocommit=False, autoflush=False,
bind=engine)
Next, we need a declarative base class that stores a catalog of classes and
mapped tables in the Declarative system.
from sqlalchemy.ext.declarative import declarative_base
Base = declarative_base()
Books, a subclass of Base, is mapped to a book table in the database.
Attributes in the Books class correspond to the data types of the columns
in the target table. Note that the id attribute corresponds to the primary
key in the book table.
from sqlalchemy import Column, Integer, String
class Books(Base):
    __tablename__ = 'book'
    id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True, nullable=False)
    title = Column(String(50), unique=True)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

90

    author = Column(String(50))
    publisher = Column(String(50))
Base.metadata.create_all(bind=engine)
The create_all() method creates the corresponding tables in the database.
We now have to declare a Pydantic model that corresponds to the
declarative base subclass (Books class defined above).
from typing import List
from pydantic import BaseModel, constr

class Book(BaseModel):
    id: int
    title: str
    author:str
    publisher: str

    class Config:
        orm_mode = True
Note the use of orm_mode=True in the config class indicating that it is
mapped with the ORM class of SQLAlchemy.
Rest of the code is just similar to in -memory CRUD operations, with the
difference being the operation functions interact with the database through
SQLalchemy interface. The POST operation on the FastAPI application
object is defined below:
from fastapi import FastAPI, Depends
app=FastAPI()

def get_db():
    db = session()
    try:
        yield db
    finally:

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

91

        db.close()

@app.post('/add_new', response_model=Book)
def add_book(b1: Book, db: Session = Depends(get_db)):
    bk=Books(id=b1.id, title=b1.title, author=b1.author,
publisher=b1.publisher)
    db.add(bk)
    db.commit()
    db.refresh(bk)
    return Books(**b1.dict())
A database session is first established. Data from the POST request body is
added to the book table as a new row. Execute the add_book() operation
function to add sample data to the books table. To verify, you can use
SQLiteStudio, a GUI tool for SQLite databases.

Two operation functions for GET operation are defined, one for fetching all
the records, and one for the record matching a path parameter.
Following is the get_books() function bound to the /list route. When
executed, its server response is the list of all records.
@app.get('/list', response_model=List[Book])
def get_books(db: Session = Depends(get_db)):
    recs = db.query(Books).all()
    return recs

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

92

The /book/{id} route calls the get_book() function with id as path
parameter. The SQLAlchemy’s query returns an object corresponding to the
given id.
@app.get('/book/{id}', response_model=Book)
def get_book(id:int, db: Session = Depends(get_db)):
    return db.query(Books).filter(Books.id == id).first()
The following image shows the result of get_books() function executed
from the Swagger UI.
