<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 26-33 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 26–33)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

21

POST Used to send HTML form data to the server. Data received
by the POST method is not cached by the server.
PUT Replaces all current representations of the target resource
with the uploaded content.
DELETE Removes all current representations of the target resource
given by a URL.

The async keyword in the function’s definition tells FastAPI that it is to be
run asynchronously i.e. without blocking the current thread of execution.
However, a path operation function can be defined without the async prefix
also.
This decorated function returns a JSON response. Although it can return
almost any of Python’s objects, it will be automatically converted to JSON.
Further in this tutorial, we shall see how such a function returns Pydantic
model objects.
The URL’s endpoint or path can have one or more variable parameters. They
can be accepted by using Python’s string formatting notation. In the above
example URL http://localhost:8000/hello/TutorialsPoint,  the last value may
change in every client request. This variable parameter can be accepted in
a variable as defined in the path and passed to the formal parameters
defined in the function bound to the operation decorator.
Example
Add another path decorator with a variable parameter in the route, and bind
hello() function to have name parameter. Modify the main.py as per the
following.
import uvicorn
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
async def index():
    return {"message": "Hello World"}

@app.get("/hello/{name}")

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

22

async def hello(name):
    return {"name": name}
Start the Uvicorn server and visit http://localhost:8000/hello/Tutorialspoint
URL. The browser shows the following JSON response.
{"name":"Tutorialspoint"}
Change the variable path parameter to something else such as
http://localhost:8000/hello/Python so that the browser shows:
{"name":"Python"}
Check OpenAPI docs
Now if we c heck the OpenAPI documentation by entering the URL as
http://localhost:8000/docs, it will show two routes and their respective view
functions. Click the try out button below /hello/{name} button and give
Tutorialspoint as the value of the name parameter’s description and then
click the Execute button.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

23


It will then show the Curl command, the request URL and the details of
server’s response with response body and response headers.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

24


A route can have multiple parameters separated by "/" symbol.
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()
@app.get("/hello/{name}/{age}")
async def hello(name,age):

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

25

    return {"name": name, "age":age}
In this case, /hello is the route, followed by two parameters put in curly
brackets. If the URL given in the browser’s address bar is
http://localhost:8000/hello/Ravi/20, The data of Ravi and 20 will be
assigned to variables name and age respectively. The browser displays the
following JSON response:
{"name":"Ravi","age":"20"}
Path Parameters with T ypes
You can use Python’s type hints for the parameters of the function to be
decorated. In this case, define name as str and age as int.
@app.get("/hello/{name}/{age}")
async def hello(name:str,age:int):
    return {"name": name, "age":age}
This will result in the browser displaying an HTTP error message in the JSON
response if the types don’t match. Try entering
http://localhost:8000/hello/20/Ravi as the URL. The browser’s response will
be as follows:
{
  "detail": [
    {
      "loc": [
        "path",
        "age"
      ],
      "msg": "value is not a valid integer",
      "type": "type_error.integer"
    }
  ]

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

26

}
The reason is obvious as age being integer, can’t accept a string value. This
will also be reflected in the Swagger UI (OpenAPI) documentation.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

27

A classical method of passing the request data to the server is to append a
query string to the URL. Assuming that a Python script (hello.py) on a server
is executed as CGI, a list of key-value pairs concatenated by the
ampersand (&) forms the query string , which is appended to the URL by
putting a question mark (?) as a separator. For example:
http://localhost/cgi-bin/hello.py?name=Ravi&age=20
The trailing part of the URL, after (?), is th e query string, which is then
parsed by the server-side script for further processing.
As mentioned, the query string is a list of parameter=value pairs
concatenated by & symbol. FastAPI automatically treats the part of the
endpoint which is not a path parameter as a query string and parses it into
parameters and its values. These parameters are passed to the function
below the operation decorator.
Example
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/hello")
async def hello(name:str,age:int):
    return {"name": name, "age":age}
Start the Uvicorn server and this URL in the browser:
http://localhost:8000/hello?name=Ravi&age=20
You should get the same JSON response. However, checking the t ells you
that FastAPI has detected that /hello endpoint has no path parameters, but
query parameters.
9. FastAPI – Query Parameters

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

28


Click the Try it out button, enter "Ravi" and "20" as values, and press the
Execute button. The documentation page now shows Curl command,
request URL, and the body and headers of HTTP response.
