<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 34-41 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 34–41)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

29


Example
You can use Python’s type hints for the parameters of the function to be
decorated. In this case, define name as str and age as int.
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

30

@app.get("/hello/{name}")
async def hello(name:str,age:int):
    return {"name": name, "age":age}
Try entering http://localhost:8000/docs as the URL. This will open the
Swagger UI (OpenAPI) documentation. The parameter 'name' is a path
parameter and 'age' is a query parameter.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

31

It is possible to apply validation conditions on path parameters as well
as query parameters of the URL. In order to apply the validation conditions
on a path parameter, you need to import the Path class. In addition to the
default value of the parameter, you can specify the maximum and minimum
length in the case of a string parameter.
from fastapi import FastAPI, Path
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/hello/{name}")
async def hello(name:str=Path(...,min_length=3,
max_length=10)):
    return {"name": name}
If the browser’s URL contains the parameter with a length less than 3 or
more than 10, as in ( http://localhost:8000/hello/Tutorialspoint), there will
be an appropriate error message such as:
{
  "detail": [
    {
      "loc": [
        "path",
        "name"
      ],
      "msg": "ensure this value has at most 10 characters",
      "type": "value_error.any_str.max_length",
      "ctx": {
        "limit_value": 10
      }
10. FastAPI – Parameter Validation

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

32

    }
  ]
}
The OpenAPI docs also shows the validations applied:

Validation rules can be applied on numeric parameters too, using the
operators as given below:
 gt: greater than
 ge: greater than or equal
 lt: less than
 le: less than or equal
Let us modify the  above operation decorator to include age as a path
parameter and apply the validations.
from fastapi import FastAPI, Path
app = FastAPI()
@app.get("/hello/{name}/{age}")

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

33

async def hello(*, name: str=Path(...,min_length=3 ,
max_length=10), age: int = Path(..., ge=1, le=100)):
    return {"name": name, "age":age}
In this case, validation rules are applied for both the parameters name and
age. If the URL entered is http://localhost:8000/hello/hi/110, then the
JSON response shows following explanations for validation failure:
{
  "detail": [
    {
      "loc": [
        "path",
        "name"
      ],
      "msg": "ensure this value has at least 3 characters",
      "type": "value_error.any_str.min_length",
      "ctx": {
        "limit_value": 3
      }
    },
    {
      "loc": [
        "path",
        "age"
      ],
      "msg": "ensure this value is less than or equal to 100",
      "type": "value_error.number.not_le",
      "ctx": {
        "limit_value": 100
      }

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

34

    }
  ]
}
The swagger UI documentation also identifies the constraints.

The query parameters can also have the validation rules applied to them.
You have to specify them as the part of arguments of Query class
constructor.
Let us add a q uery parameter called percent in the above function and
apply the validation rules as ge=0 (i.e., greater then equal to 0) and
lt=100 (less than or equal to 100)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

35

from fastapi import FastAPI, Path, Query

@app.get("/hello/{name}/{age}")
async def hello(*, name: str=Path(...,min_length=3 ,
max_length=10), \
                age: int = Path(..., ge=1, le=100), \
                percent:float=Query(..., ge=0, le=100)):
    return {"name": name, "age":age}
If the URL entered is http://localhost:8000/hello/Ravi/20?percent=79, then
the browser displays following JSON response:
{"name":"Ravi","age":20}
FastAPI correctly identifies percent as a query parameter with validati on
conditions applied. It is reflected in the OpenAPI documentation as follows:

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

36


While the client can send the path and query parameters to the API server
using GET method, we need to apply POST method to send some binary
data as a part of the HTTP request. This binary data may be in the form of
an object of any Python class. It forms the request body. FastAPI uses
Pydantic library for this purpose.
