<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 18-25 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 18–25)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

13


Python’s new type hinting feature helps in prom pting the user with the
expected type of the parameters to be passed. This is done by adding a
colon and data type after the parameter. We’ll redefine the division()
function as follows:

Note that while calling the function, Python hints at the expected type of
each parameter to be passed. However, this doesn’t prevent the TypeError
from appearing if an incompatible value is passed. You will have to use a
static type checker such as MyPy to check for compatibility before running.
Just as the formal parameters in the function’s definition, it is possible to
provide type hint for a function’s return value. Just before the colon symbol
in the function’s definition statement (after which the function block starts)
add an arrow (->) and the type.

However, as mentioned earlier, if incompatible values are passed to the
function, or returned by the function, Python reports TypeError. Use of MyPy
static type checker can detect such errors. Install mypy package first.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

14

pip3 install mypy
Save the following code as typecheck.py
def division(x:int, y:int) -> int:
 return (x//y)

a=division(10,2)
print (a)

b=division(5,2.5)
print (b)

c=division("Hello",10)
print (c)
Check this code for type errors using mypy.
C:\python37>mypy typechk.py
typechk.py:7: error: Argument 2 to "division" has incompatible
type "float"; expected "int"
typechk.py:10: error: Argument 1 to "division" has
incompatible type "str"; expected "int"
Found 2 errors in 1 file (checked 1 source file)
There are errors in second and third calls to the function. In second, value
passed to y is float when int is expected. In third, value passed to x is str
when int is expected. (Note that // operator returns integer division)
All standard d ata types can be used as type hints. This can be done with
global variables, variables as function parameters, inside function definition
etc.
x: int = 3
y: float = 3.14

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

15

nm: str = 'abc'
married: bool = False
names: list = ['a', 'b', 'c']
marks: tuple = (10, 20, 30)
marklist: dict = {'a': 10, 'b': 20, 'c': 30}
A new addition in newer versions of Python (version 3.5 onwards) standard
library is the typing module. It defines special types for corresponding
standard collection types. The types on typing module are List, Tuple,
Dict, and Sequence. It also consists of Union and Optional types. Note
that standard names of data types are all in small case, whereas ones in
typing module have first letter in upper case. Using this feature, we can ask
a collection of a particular type.
from typing import List, Tuple, Dict

# following line declares a List object of strings.
# If violated, mypy shows error
cities: List[str] = ['Mumbai', 'Delhi', 'Chennai']

# This is Tuple with three elements respectively
# of str, int and float type)
employee: Tuple[str, int, float] = ('Ravi', 25, 35000)

# Similarly in the following Dict, the object key should be str
# and value should be of int type, failing which
# static type checker throws error
marklist: Dict[str, int] = {'Ravi': 61, 'Anil': 72}

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

16

The Type Hinting feature of Python is most effectively used in almost all
IDEs (Integrated Development Environments) such as PyCharm and VS
Code to provide dynamic autocomplete features.
Let us see how VS Code  uses the type hints to provide autocomplete
suggestions while writing a code. In the example below, a function named
as sayhello with name as an argument has been defined. The function
returns a string by concatenating “Hello” to the name parameter by adding
a space in between. Additionally, it is required to ensure that the first letter
of the name be in upper case.
Python’s str class has a capitalize() method for the purpose, but if one
doesn’t remember it while typing the code, one has to search for it
elsewhere. If you give a dot after name, you expect the list of attributes but
nothing is shown because Python doesn’t know what will be the runtime
type of name variable.

Here, type hint comes handy. Include str as the type of name in the
function definition. Now when you press dot (.) after name, a drop down
list of all string methods appears, from which the required method (in this
case capitalize()) can be picked.
6. FastAPI – IDE Support

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

17


It is also possible to use type hints with a user defined class. In the following
example a rectangle class is defined with type hints for arguments to the
__init__() constructor.
class rectangle:
    def __init__(self, w:int, h:int) ->None:
        self.width=w
        self.height=h
Following is a function that uses an object of above rec tangle class as an
argument. The type hint used in the declaration is the name of the class.
def area(r:rectangle)->int:
    return r.width*r.height

r1=rectangle(10,20)
print ("area = ", area(r1))
In this case also, the IDE editor provides autocomplete su pport prompting
list of the instance attributes. Following is a screenshot of PyCharm editor.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

18


FastAPI makes extensive use of the type hints. This feature is found
everywhere, such as path parameters, query parameters, headers, bodies,
dependencies, etc. as well as validating the data from the incoming request.
The OpenAPI document generation also uses type hints.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

19

RElational State Transfer (REST) is a software architectural style. REST
defines how the architecture of a web application should behave. It is a
resource based architecture where everything that the REST server hosts,
(a file, an image, or a row in a table of a database), is a resource , having
many representations.
REST recommends certain architectural constraints.
 Uniform interface

 Statelessness

 Client-server

 Cacheability

 Layered system

 Code on demand
REST constraints has the following advantages:
 Scalability

 Simplicity

 Modifiability

 Reliability

 Portability

 Visibility

REST uses HTTP verbs or methods for the operation on the resources. The
POST, GET, PUT and DELETE methods perform respectively CREATE, READ,
UPDATE and DELETE operations respectively.
7. FastAPI – REST Architecture

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

20

Modern web frameworks use routes or endpoints as a part of URL instead
of file-based URLs. This helps the user to remember the application URLs
more effectively. In FastAPI, it is termed a path. A path or route is the part
of the URL trailing after the first ‘/’.
For example, in the following URL,
http://localhost:8000/hello/TutorialsPoint
the path or the route would be
/hello/TutorialsPoint
In FastAPI, such a path string is given as a parameter to the operation
decorator. The operation here refers to the HTTP verb used by the browser
to send the data. These operations include GET, PUT, etc. The operation
decorator (for example, @app.get("/")) is immediately followed by a
function that is executed when the specified URL is visited. In the below
example:
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
async def index():
    return {"message": "Hello World"}
Here, ("/") is the path,  get is the operation, @app.get("/") is the path
operation decorator, and the index() function just below it is termed as
path operation function.
Any of the following HTTP verbs can be used as operations.
GET Sends data in unencrypted form to the server. Most
common method.
HEAD Same as GET, but without the response body.
8. FastAPI – Path Parameters
