<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 106-113 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 106–113)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

101

Below the commented section, enter the following query using the Explorer
bar of the Graphiql IDE. Run the query to display the result in the output
pane.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

102

A WebSocket is a persistent connection between a client and server  to
provide bidirectional, full-duplex communication between the two. The
communication takes place over HTTP through a single TCP/IP socket
connection. It can be seen as an upgrade of HTTP instead of a protocol
itself.
One of the limitations of HTTP is that it is a strictly half -duplex or
unidirectional protocol. With WebSockets, on the other hand, we can send
message-based data, similar to UDP, but with the reliability of TCP.
WebSocket uses HTTP as the initial transport mechanism, but keeps the
TCP connection alive the connection after the HTTP resp onse is received .
Same connection object it can be used two-way communication  between
client and server. Thus, real-time applications can be built using WebSocket
APIs.
FastAPI supports WebSockets through WebSocket class in FastAPI module.
Following exampl e demonstrates functioning of WebSocket in FastAPI
application.
First we have an index() function that renders a template (socket.html). It
is bound to "/" route. The HTML file socket.html is placed in the “templates”
folder.
main.py
from fastapi import FastAPI,  Request
from fastapi.responses import HTMLResponse
from fastapi.templating import Jinja2Templates
templates = Jinja2Templates(directory="templates")

from fastapi.staticfiles import StaticFiles

app = FastAPI()

app.mount("/static", StaticFiles(directory="static"), name="static")

28. FastAPI – WebSockets

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

103

@app.get("/", response_class=HTMLResponse)
async def index(request: Request):
    return templates.TemplateResponse("socket.html", {"request":
request})
The template file renders a text box and a button.
socket.html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
    <head>
        <title>Chat</title>
  <script src="{{ url_for('static',
path='ws.js') }}"></script>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h1>WebSocket Chat</h1>
        <form action="" onsubmit="sendMessage(event)">
            <input type="text" id="messageText"
autocomplete="off"/>
            <button>Send</button>
        </form>
        <ul id='messages'>
        </ul>
    </body>
</html>
Inside the socket.html, there is a call to the JavaScript function to be
executed on the form’s  submit. Hence, to serve JavaScript, the "static"
folder is first mounted. The JavaScript file  ws.js is placed in the "static"
folder.


ws.js

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

104

var ws = new WebSocket("ws://localhost:8000/ws");
ws.onmessage = function(event) {
 var messages = document.getElementById('messages')
 var message = document.createElement('li')
 var content = document.createTextNode(event.data)
 message.appendChild(content)
 messages.appendChild(message)
};
function sendMessage(event) {
 var input = document.getElementById("messageText")
 ws.send(input.value)
 input.value = ''
 event.preventDefault()
}
As the JavaScript code is loaded, it creates a websocket listening at
"ws://localhost:8000/ws". The sendMessage() function directs the input
message to the WebSocket URL.
This route invokes the websocket_endpoint() function in the application
code. The incoming connection request is accepted and the incoming
message is echoed on the client browser.  Add the below code to main.py.
from fastapi import WebSocket
@app.websocket("/ws")
async def websocket_endpoint(websocket: WebSocket):
    await websocket.accept()
    while True:
        data = await websocket.receive_text()
        await websocket.send_text(f"Message text was: {data}")
Save the FastAPI code file (main.py), template (socket.html) and JavaScript
file (ws.js). Run the Uvicorn server and visit http://localhost:8000/ to
render the chat window as below:

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

105


Type a certain text and press Sen d button. The input message will be
redirected on the browser through the websocket.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

106

Event handlers are the functions to be executed when a certain identified
event occurs. In FastAPI, two such events are identified – startup and
shutdown. FastAPI’s application object has on_event() decorator that
uses one of these events as an argument. The function registered with this
decorator is fired when the corresponding event occurs.
The startup event occurs before the development  server starts and the
registered function is typically used to perform certain initialization tasks,
establishing connection with the database etc. The event handler of
shutdown event is called just before the application shutdown.
Example
Here is a simpl e example of startup and shutdown event handlers. As the
app starts, the starting time is echoed in the console log. Similarly, when
the server is stopped by pressing ctrl+c, the shutdown time is also
displayed.
main.py
from fastapi import FastAPI
import datetime

app = FastAPI()

@app.on_event("startup")
async def startup_event():
    print('Server started :', datetime.datetime.now())

@app.on_event("shutdown")
async def shutdown_event():
    print('server Shutdown :', datetime.datetime.now())
29. FastAPI – FastAPI Event Handlers

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

107

Output
It will produce the following output:
uvicorn main:app --reload

INFO: Uvicorn running on http://127.0.0.1:8000 (Press CTRL+C
to quit)
INFO: Started reloader process [28720]
INFO: Started server process [28722]
INFO: Waiting for application startup.
Server started: 2021-11-23 23:51:45.907691
INFO: Application startup complete.
INFO: Shutting down
INFO: Waiting for application
server Shutdown: 2021-11-23 23:51:50.82955
INFO: Application shutdown com
INFO: Finished server process

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

108

If you have two independent FastAPI apps, one of them can be mounted on
top of the other. The one that is mounted is called a sub -application. The
app.mount() method adds another completely "independent" application
in a specific path of the main app. It then takes care of handling everything
under that path, with the path operations declared in that sub-application.
Let us first declare a simple FastAPI application object to be used as a top
level application.
from fastapi import FastAPI

app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/app")
def mainindex():
    return {"message": "Hello World from Top level app"}
Then create another application object subapp and add its own path
operations.
subapp = FastAPI()

@subapp.get("/sub")
def subindex():
    return {"message": "Hello World from sub app"}
Mount this subapp object on the main app by using mount() method. Two
parameters needed are the URL route and name of the sub application.
app.mount("/subapp", subapp)
Both the main and sub application will have its own docs as can be inspected
using Swagger UI.
30. FastAPI – Mounting a Sub-App
