<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 66-73 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 66–73)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

61


@app.get("/upload/", response_class=HTMLResponse)
async def upload(request: Request):
    return templates.TemplateResponse("uploadfile.html",
{"request": request})
Visit http://localhost:8000/upload/. You should get the form with Choose
File button. Click it to open the file to be uploaded.

The upload operation is handled by UploadFile function in FastAPI
from fastapi import FastAPI, File, UploadFile
import shutil

@app.post("/uploader/")
async def create_upload_file(file: UploadFile = File(...)):
    with open("destination.png", "wb") as buffer:
        shutil.copyfileobj(file.file, buffer)

    return {"filename": file.filename}
We shall use shutil library in Python to copy the received file in the server
location by the name destination.png

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

62

A cookie is one of the HTTP headers. The web server sends a response to
the client, in addition to the data requested, it also inserts one or more
cookies. A cookie is a very small amount of data, that is stored  in the
client’s machine. On subsequent connection requests from the same client,
this cookie data is also attached along with the HTTP requests.
The cookies are useful for recording information about client’s browsing.
Cookies are a reliable method of retrieving stateful information in otherwise
stateless communication by HTTP protocol.
In FastAPI, the cookie parameter is set on the response object with the help
of set_cookie() method
response.set_cookie(key, value)
Example
Here is an example of set_cookie() method. We have a JSON response
object called content. Call the set_cookie() method on it to set a cookie
as key="usrname" and value="admin":
from fastapi import FastAPI
from fastapi.responses import JSONResponse

app = FastAPI()
@app.post("/cookie/")
def create_cookie():
    content = {"message": "cookie set"}
    response = JSONResponse(content=content)
    response.set_cookie(key="username", value="admin")
    return response
To read back the cookie on a subsequent visit, use the Cookie object in the
FastAPI library.
18. FastAPI – Cookie Parameters

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

63

from fastapi import FastAPI, Cookie
app = FastAPI()
@app.get("/readcookie/")
async def read_cookie(username: str = Cookie(None)):
    return {"username": username}
Inspect these two endpoints in the Swagger API. There are these two routes
"/cookies" and "/readcookie". Execute the create_cookie() function
bound to "/cookies". The response is just the content, although the cookie
is set.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

64

When the read_cookie() function is executed, the cookie is read back and
appears as the response. Also, not that the documentation identifies the
user name as a cookie parameter.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

65

In order to read the values of an HTTP header that is a part of the client
request, import the Header object from the FastAPI library, and declare a
parameter of Header type in the operation function definition. The name of
the parameter should match with the HTTP header converted in
camel_case.
In the following example, the "accept-language" header is to be retrieved.
Since Python doesn’t allow "-" (dash) in the name of identifier, it is replaced
by "_" (underscore)
from typing import Optional
from fastapi import FastAPI, Header

app = FastAPI()
@app.get("/headers/")
async def read_header(accept_language: Optional[str] =
Header(None)):
    return {"Accept-Language": accept_language}
As the following Swagger documentation shows, the retrieved header is
shown as the response body.
19. FastAPI – Header Parameters

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

66


You can push custom as well as predefined headers in the response object.
The operation function should have a parameter of Response type. In order
to set a custom header, its name should be prefixed with "X". In the
following case, a custom header called "X -Web-Framework" and a
predefined header “Content-Language" is added along with the response of
the operation function.
from fastapi import FastAPI
from fastapi.responses import JSONResponse

app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/rspheader/")
def set_rsp_headers():
    content = {"message": "Hello World"}
    headers = {"X-Web-Framework": "FastAPI", "Content-Language": "en-US"}
    return JSONResponse(content=content, headers=headers)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

67

The newly added headers will appear in the response header section of the
documentation.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

68

An operation function returns A JSON response to the client. The response
can be in the form of Python primary types , i.e., numbers, string, list or
dict, etc. It can also be in the form of a Pydantic model. For a function to
return a model object, the operation decorator should declare a
respone_model parameter.
With the help of response_model, FastAPI Converts the output data to a
structure of a model class. It validates the data, adds a JSON Schema for
the response, in the OpenAPI path operation.
One of the important advantages of response_model parameter is that we
can format the output by selecting the fields from the model to cast the
response to an output model.
Example
In the following example, the POST operation decorator r eceives the
request body in the form of an object of the student class (a subclass of
BaseModel). As one of the fields in this class, i.e. marks (a list of marks) is
not needed in the response, we define another model called percent and
use it as the response_model parameter.
from typing import List
from fastapi import FastAPI
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field

app = FastAPI()

class student(BaseModel):
    id: int
    name :str = Field(None, title="name of student", max_length=10)
    marks: List[int] = []
    percent_marks: float
class percent(BaseModel):
20. FastAPI – Response Model
