<!-- extracted from fastapi_tutorial.pdf pages 98-105 -->

# fastapi_tutorial.pdf (pages 98–105)

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

93

The update and delete operations are performed by update_book()
function (executed when /update/{id} route is visited) and del_book()
function called when the route /delete/{id} is given in as the URL.
@app.put('/update/{id}', response_model=Book)
def update_book(id:int, book:Book, db: Session = Depends(get_db)):
    b1 = db.query(Books).filter(Books.id == id).first()
    b1.id=book.id
    b1.title=book.title
    b1.author=book.author
    b1.publisher=book.publisher
    db.commit()
    return db.query(Books).filter(Books.id == id).first()

@app.delete('/delete/{id}')
def del_book(id:int, db: Session = Depends(get_db)):
    try:
        db.query(Books).filter(Books.id == id).delete()
        db.commit()
    except Exception as e:
        raise Exception(e)
    return {"delete status": "success"}
If you intend to use any other database in place of SQLite, you need to only
the change the dialect definition accordingly. For example, to use MySQL
database and pymysql driver, change the statement of engine object t o
the following:
engine =
create_engine('mysql+pymysql://user:password@localhost/test')

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

94

FastAPI can also use NoSQL databases such as MongoDB, Cassandra,
CouchDB, etc. as the backend for the CRUD operations of a REST app. In
this topic, we shall see how to use MongoDB in a FastAPI application.
MongoDB is a d ocument oriented database, in which t he semi-structured
documents are stored in formats like JSON. Documents can contain many
different key-value pairs, or key-array pairs, or even nested documents. It
is a collection of key-value pairs, similar to Python dictionary object. One or
more such documents are stored in a Collection.
A Collection in MongoDB is equivalent to a table in relational database.
However, MongoDB (as do all the NoSQL databases) doesn't have a
predefined schema. A Document is similar to single row in a table of SQL
based relational database. Each document may be of variable number of
key-value pairs. Thus MongoDB is a schema-less database.
To use MongoDB with FastAPI, MongoDB server must be installed on the
machine. We also need to install PyMongo, an official Python driver for
MongoDB.
pip3 install pymongo
Before interacting with MongoDB database through Python and FastAPI
code, ensure that MongoDB is running by issuing following command
(assuming that MongoDB server is installed in e:\mongodb folder).
E:\mongodb\bin>mongod
..
waiting for connections on port 27017
An object of MongoClient class in the PyMongo module is the handle using
which Python interacts with MongoDB server.
from pymongo import MongoClient
client=MongoClient()
26. FastAPI – Using MongoDB

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

95

We define Book as the BaseModel class to populate the request body (same
as the one used in the SQLite example)
from pydantic import BaseModel
from typing import List
class Book(BaseModel):
    bookID: int
    title: str
    author:str
    publisher: str
Set up the FastAPI application object:
from fastapi import FastAPI, status
app = FastAPI()
The POST operation decorator has "/add_new" as URL route and executes
add_book() function. It parses the Book BaseModel object into a dictionary
and adds a document in the BOOK_COLLECTION of test database.
@app.post("/add_new", status_code=status.HTTP_201_CREATED)
def add_book(b1: Book):
    """Post a new message to the specified channel."""
    with MongoClient() as client:
        book_collection = client[DB][BOOK_COLLECTION]
        result = book_collection.insert_one(b1.dict())
        ack = result.acknowledged
        return {"insertion": ack}
Add a few documents using the web interface of Swagger UI by visiting
http://localhost:8000/docs. You can verify the collection in the Compass
GUI front end for MongoDB.

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

96


To retrieve the list of all books, let us include the following get operation
function – get_books(). It will be executed when " /books" URL route is
visited.
@app.get("/books", response_model=List[str])
def get_books():
    """Get all books in list form."""
    with MongoClient() as client:
        book_collection = client[DB][BOOK_COLLECTION]
        booklist = book_collection.distinct("title")
        return booklist
In this case, the server response will be the list of all titles in the books
collection.
[
  "Computer Fundamentals",
  "Python Cookbook",
  "Let Us Python"
]

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

97

This following GET decorator retrieves a book document corresponding to
given ID as path parameter:
@app.get("/books/{id}", response_model=Book)
def get_book(id: int):
    """Get all messages for the specified channel."""
    with MongoClient() as client:
        book_collection = client[DB][BOOK_COLLECTION]
        b1 = book_collection.find_one({"bookID": id})
        return b1
Swagger UI documentation page shows the following interface:

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

98

The server’s JSON response, when the above function is executed, is as
follows:

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

99

Facebook developed GraphQL in 2012, a new API standard with the
intention of optimizing RESTful API Calls. GraphQL is the data query and
manipulation language for the API. GraphQL is more flexible, efficient, and
accurate as compared to REST. A  GraphQL server provides only a single
endpoint and responds with the precise data required by the client.
As GraphQL is compatible with ASGI, it can be easily i ntegrated with a
FastAPI application. There are many Python libraries for GraphQL. Some of
them are listed below:
 Strawberry
 Ariadne
 Tartiflette
 Graphene
FastAPI’s official documentation recommends using Strawberry library as
its design is also based on type annotations (as in the case of FastAPI itself).
In order to integrate GraphQL with a FastAPI app, first decorate a Python
class as Strawberry type.
@strawberry.type
class Book:
    title: str
    author: str
    price: int
Next, declare a Query class containing a function that returns a Book
object.
@strawberry.type
class Query:
    @strawberry.field
    def book(self) -> Book:
        return Book(title="Computer Fundamentals",
author="Sinha", price=300)
27. FastAPI – Using GraphQL

FastAPI – Python Web Framework

100

Use this Query class as the parameter to obtain Strawberry.Schema object.
schema = strawberry.Schema(query=Query)
Then declare the objects of both GraphQL class and FastAPI application class.
graphql_app = GraphQL(schema)
app = FastAPI()
Finally, add routes to the FastAPI object and run the server.
app.add_route("/book", graphql_app)
app.add_websocket_route("/book", graphql_app)
Visit http://localhost:8000/book in the browser. An in -browser GraphQL
IDE opens up.
